The Survivalist/Flourisher-Dichotomy

Timothy D. Chase

INTRODUCTION:

In her article "Introduction to Objectivist Ethics," Ayn Rand states that the fundamental standard of value is man's life. Later in the same article, she qualifies this with the phrase "man qua man." Ever since, adherents of her philosophy have been arguing about how we should interpret this standard. Does it mean, for example, that only thing in life which one should pursue is mere survival? Or does the phrase "man qua man" somehow smuggle-in other values?

Survivalists argue, for example, that even if life as the standard of value is interpreted narrowly, we may recognize that happiness generally contributes to man's survival, and thus while all our activity should ultimately be directed towards life as the only ultimate value, this does not prevent us from pursuing such things as happiness insofar as they contribute to our survival. Flourishers, on the otherhand, have interpreted "man qua man" as modifying the standard of value in such a way that other values --such as rationality or happiness-- are automatically included in the standard. In their view, even if these values do not contribute to one's survival, one's pursuit of these values to at least some degree is justified.

In the article which follows, I will analyze both positions, and in the process come to my own.

THESIS: Against Flourishing


Section One: The Nature of Flourishing

Now if we are to properly get a handle on this debate, there are certain distinctions which must be made. First, there are some values which we pursue simply as means to other ends. These are what we can instrumental values. Then there are some ends which we pursue, not because they lead to any other values, but which we simply pursue for their own sake. These are what we call ends-in-themselves. Now, in deference to the flourishers, I am willing to --for the moment-- consider the possibility that there exists some values which we pursue both because they are valuable in-themselves and because they serve as the means to other ends-in-themselves.

This was, in fact, Aristotle's own approach. Now to understand how a given value may be --according to Aristotle-- both an end-in-itself and an instrumental value, we may take the example of the bird and its young. The bird devotes precious resources to its young, such as the time and energy which it could otherwise spend feeding itself. Thus, for those who accept Aristotle's interpretation of the bird's activity, it is clear that the bird does not simply have its own life as the end-in-itself towards which all of its activity is directed.

Yet one cannot assume that the end towards which the bird's activity is directed is simply the survival of its offspring, either. If this were true, then it would be true of the offspring, itself. The offspring would not exist simply as an end-in-itself, but only for the sake of its own future offspring, and the same principle would be applicable to each succeeding generation of offspring, leading to an infinite regress in which nothing serves as an end-in-itself. Furthermore, if we assume that a bird's own life is simply directed towards the life of its offspring, then we would leave unexplained the behavior of the bird once it is no longer capable of reproduction: a bird will continue to feed itself and seek shelter even once the bird is no longer able to lay eggs.

Thus, in Aristotle's view, we "must" assume that the activity of the bird is both directed towards its own survival as an end-in-itself and towards the survival of its offspring as an end-in-itself. And insofar as the survival of the bird serves both as an end-in-itself and as a means to the survival of the offspring, we "must" assume that the bird's own life is both an end-in-itself and an instrumental value.


Section Two: The Foundations for the Problem

Now of course, Dr. Harry Binswanger has given an argument that it is possible for the strict survivalist to explain the behavior of the bird (which acts deterministically in the same way that its predecessors have) strictly in terms of its pursuit of its own life. I won't repeat it here, but simply refer the reader back to his book "The Teleological Basis of Biological Concepts." I will, however, point out that by itself, this argument does not establish that the survivalist is right-- it simply establishes the point that the survivalist is still a contender: the fact that a bird engages in reproductive behavior which diverts precious resources away from its own survival (in the context of its own lifetime) does not eliminate the survivalist interpretation as one of the interpretations of the bird's behavior which fits the evidence.

Thus given simply what has been presented so far, both the survivalist interpretation and the flourisher interpretation seem to be possible. But now I will state the argument by which one eliminates the view that there may exist more than one end which serves as an end-in-itself, e.g., that both the life of the bird and of its offspring are ends-in-themselves towards which the activity of the bird is directed, and that both life and happiness are ends-in-themselves towards which the activity of the moral person should be directed.

Let us assume that there are two or more values which are ends-in-themselves towards which the activity of a living being is directed. If this is the case, then the actions of the organism will sometimes serve to promote the achievement of one end-in-itself, and sometimes serve to promote the achievement of the other. Now let us assume that the extent to which the action of an organism can promote the achievement of an end-in-itself exists in degrees. In other words, some actions will serve to promote the achievement of an end-in-itself, but not as much as others. I may, for example, have an apple or a candy. The candy would give me some energy, but the apple would be better for my overall health. People may survive on rice, but they will be healthier on three-course meals, and as the survivalist would argue, live longer if they have such meals.


Section Three: The Probem with Flourishing

Now if, as the flourisher believes, there are two or more ends-in-themselves towards which the activity of the moral man should be directed, there will come times when he will have to make trade-offs: he may engage in an action which contributes to his survival to a high degree but contributes to his happiness only to a low or negative degree (for example, exercising), or he may engage in an action which contributes to his survival to a small or negative degree but contributes to his happiness to a high degree (for example, going to the movies). Now it is clear that he has a choice between two alternatives. What is the standard by reference to which he is to make that choice?

As long as there is only one value which serves as an end-in-itself towards which all of his action is directed, it may serve as the standard by reference to which he acts and chooses between alternatives. However, now he is faced with a choice between two alternatives, one of which essentially promotes one end-in-itself, the other of which essentially promotes the other end-in-itself. If he is to rationally choose between these two alternatives, it must be by reference to some standard. Furthermore, assuming that we take a teleological approach, this standard must be one which guides him in the achievement of some single end. Having two or more values which serve as ends-in-themselves is the same as having two or more ultimate standards which guides one's actions. But, speaking metaphorically, you can serve only one god.

Which will it be? If there exists some standard by reference to which you settle a conflict between two or more standards guiding your actions (e.g., "promote your happiness" and "promote your survival"), then the standard by reference to which you settle the conflict is what actually serves as your standard of value, and the value towards which it directs your action is what serves as your ultimate value, that is the one end-in-itself which is the goal towards which all of your action is directed.

Now I will consider a strategy which a flourisher might attempt to use in order to blunt the force of this argument: he has an ultimate value, but this ultimate value is neither survival nor happiness. His ultimate value consists of a combination of both survival and happiness. But this strategy does not actually answer the problem, it merely transubstanates it into another. By what criterion does the flourisher decide the mix of survival and happiness which constitutes this value? Should it consist of mostly of survival and very little happiness (with whatever happiness one achieves above this mix being considered, in effect, a fringe benefit) or should it consist mostly of happiness and very little survival? Or in otherwords, in the choice between a long, miserable life and a short, happy life, what is the standard by reference to which he should make the choice?

There can be only one ultimate standard guiding human action, otherwise there will exist no means of making a rational choice when two or more standards come into conflict.

ANTITHESIS: Against Strict Survivalism


Section One: The General Problem

In the previous part, I argued that there can be only one standard which serves as an ultimate standard guiding man's actions, and thus it would appear that I am squarely in the survivalist camp. However, I believe that, if we are to properly understand what is meant by the phrase "man qua man" with which Rand appears to qualify the man's life as the standard of value, and thereby understand the source of the flourisher's difficulties with the survivalist interpretation, further analysis will be necessary.

Man's life is the standard of value. To this extent, I agree with the survivalist. However, it is man's life, man qua man-- as a man. Now what is man? We define man as a rational animal. Now in virtue of his being an animal, he is an organism, and as an organism, life serves as his standard of value, and it is his life which serves as the purpose of his actions. However, man is also a rational being, and as a being which reasons, his actions (particularly in the realm of cognition) are subject to another standard, the standard of objectivity. Now the question is, How are these two standards related?

In order to get at the difficulties which might be involved in having two standards applicable to human action (where both are at least potentially applicable to cognition as a form of human action), I will recall a rather odd hypothetical example originally posed by someone else. It was suggested that it is only because rationality serves to promote life that we should be rational, and that if rationality did not serve this function, there would be no real reason to be rational, and thus there would be no question of the morality or immorality of irrational behavior. Or in otherwords, if rationality did not have survival value, then the choice between being rational and being irrational would be a mere subjective preference between one lifestyle and another.

Now in this form, I believe the hypothetical example is rather floating, and as such, needs to be anchored to reality by means of a concrete example or two. Furthermore, in this hypothetical example, we have simply considered the logical possibility of the relationship between the two standards being one of neutrality. Perhaps, with a little work, we can actually dream-up an example in which they are inversely related, so that by acting rationally, one is actually acting to thwart one's life, and by acting irrationally, one is actually acting to promote one's life. After all, as long as we are thinking in terms of logical possibilities, anything is conceivable.


Section Two: Concrete Instances of the Problem

Lets begin with one of the more realistic examples by which to concretize this otherwise free-floating, abstract possibility. Consider the example of someone who is a prisoner in a concentration camp. If the guards are particularly sadomasochistic, they may punish people who observe too much, show any inclination towards independent thought, or otherwise show signs of a living mind. They may in fact kill such individuals, whereas the people who live and act like automatons may be permitted to survive. In such an environment, it seems that rationality will get you killed, whereas irrationality of a particularly passive character might actually tend to promote your survival.

Furthermore, this is, at least according to the flourishers, a particularly good example through which to show that the survivalist cannot defend the virtues of the Objectivist Ethics by reference to the survivalist interpretation of the standard of value. Now at this point, I do not intend to defend the survivalist approach, but merely to point out a potential problem: one may choose to be rational by reference to the standard of objectivity, or one may choose to be rational by reference to the standard of value. Normally, it would not seem to matter which of these two standards one employs, but assuming that the flourishers are correct regarding this example, there is a conflict between acting in accordance with the standard of objectivity and acting in accordance with the standard of value. Which should one choose? By reference to which standard?

But before attempting to answer this question, I would like to consider another, albeit less realistic example, which nevertheless, may be less removed from common experience. Let us say that by being too rational, one is too analytical, and by being too analytical, one lives a passionless life, and furthermore, by living a passionless life, one is less motivated to pursue the values which life requires, and that as a consequence, one lives a shorter life. If this were indeed the case, then by reference to the Objectivist standard of value, one shouldn't be too rational, whereas by reference to the standard of objectivity, one should always aim at being as rational as one can. Once again, it appears that the two standards may be in conflict, and that one must choose between them.

Now as an aside, I do not believe that the two standards ever come into conflict, and that, as such, the two concrete examples are merely illusory problems. However, I think it is essential that we choose between the two standards, granting one priority, and act in accordance with the other only insofar as it is in accordance with the standard to which we grant priority. Which standard should we regard as the fundamental standard by which to direct our actions? Should we be rational because being rational promotes human life, or should we be rational because of a prior commitment to the standard of objectivity? Which standard is more fundamental?


Section Three: The Solution to the Problem

Identification precedes evaluation: one must know what something is before one can evaluate it. Furthermore, the identification of man's life as the standard of value is itself the result of the identification of a causal law, but the principles by reference to which we identify causal laws are themselves the subject matter of epistemology, and as such, a part of logic. Thus while rationality is the fundamental virtue, and we act virtuously in accordance with the standard of value, we should be rational not primarily due to our commitment to the standard of value, but because of our commitment to the standard of objectivity. The fundamental choice which confronts man at every moment of his life is not that between life and death, but between thinking and not thinking, or to be more precise, being in focus or not.

Consider this: if one actually believes that by being too rational, one is engaged in self-destructive behavior, and then grants priority to the standard of value, one will cease trying to be rational, and thus one will be unable to actually consider the evidence or the arguments. However, if one grants priority to the standard of objectivity, one can reconsider both the evidence and the arguments, and thereby correct one's thinking.

There is, in fact, only one imaginable counter-example: where one has become rationally convinced that the correct thing to do is die. In this case, of course, by acting in accordance with the standard of objectivity, one would be unable to reconsider one's arguments. However, by the same token, one would be unable to reconsider one's arguments by acting in accordance with the standard of value.

So, by reference to the standard of value, should one be rational in a concentration camp? Yes, of course one should: otherwise, how is one to know when the guards will suddenly change their minds and decide to kill you for being too passive? If you are rational, you can learn to fake being passive, but if you are truly intellectually passive, you will not be prepared for unforeseen threats to your life. However, it is only by reference to the standard of objectivity --to which one grants priority-- that one is able to discover this solution, and choose the appropriate course of action.

Thus the manner in which we should interpret the standard of value, namely, man's life, man qua man, is man's life-- as a rational being. The standard of objectivity is the fundamental standard according to which he should act. One should always be rational. One should not choose to be objective by reference to the standard of value, rather, one's choice to act in accordance with the standard of value should be the result of one's prior commitment to the standard of objectivity.

In the final analysis, there should be no conflict between the standard of objectivity and the standard of value: the standard of value is an abstract standard, which means-- a high-level principle, and as such, requires logic, not simply in order to identify it or justify it, but to apply it as well. At every step, the standard of value is dependent upon the standard of objectivity. It is, in fact, radically-dependent upon the standard of objectivity. A conflict between the two standards would ultimately reduce to a conflict between the standard of objectivity and itself, which is absurd.

Nevertheless, the standard of objectivity is more basic and deserves one's fundamental allegiance. Given this, I believe that we have the basis for recognizing a third position to those of the flourisher and the survivalist, and the manner in which they are distinct. In the next part of this paper, I will give my characterization of the debate.

SYNTHESIS: The Nature of the Survivalist/Flourisher-Debate


Section One: Critique of the Earlier Two Positions

The debate between the survivalists and the flourishers is, fundamentally, an expression of a much more fundamental (albeit false) dichotomy: intrinsicism vs. subjectivism. Now this does not mean that all survivalists are intrinsicists, nor that all flourishers are subjectivists. But what it does mean is that no one had succeeded in understanding the objective position down to the root.

Man's Life is the standard of value, which means that your life is the ultimate value towards which all of your action should be directed. On this point, the survivalists were right. However, to the extent that they did not recognize the context upon which the objective acceptance of life as the standard of value depends, they were dropping the context, and thereby treating this standard as an out-of-context absolute. This is, of course, an expression of epistemological intrinsicism. The antidote is to recognize that the standard of value is "Man's Life, man qua man," which means, man's life as a rational being. The standard of value itself can only be justified by the prior and more fundamental commitment to the standard of objectivity.

Reacting to the barreness which they saw in intrinsicist survivalism, the flourishers brought in other values to be pursued as ends-in-themselves. Sometimes these additional ends-in-themselves were virtues, such as rationality, honesty, or justice. Other times they were pleasures or happiness. By choosing virtues as ends-in-themselves, they were taking what is best interpreted as an ethical intrinsicist approach: what they were proscribing were duties, thereby placing the "I ought to" above the "it is." By choosing to regard pleasures or happiness as ends-in-themselves, they were taking what is best interpreted as a ethical subjectivist approach, in essence, placing the "I want" or "I like" above the "it is."

But does this mean that all the survivalists and flourishers are either intrinsicists or subjectivists? Only with respect to this issue and to the extent that they fail to recognize a prior commitment to the standard of objectivity. Just as the fundamental choice is not between life and death, but rather between being in focus or not being in focus, the fundamental standard guiding human action is not the standard of value, but the standard of objectivity. And it is this fact --the fact that the standard of objectivity is the fundamental standard in our philosophy-- which is the source of our philosophy's name.


Section Two: Three Additional Problems

However, if we are to properly apply both these standards, we must consider two more examples. First, what of the prisoner in the concentration camp who is rationally-convinced that he will be alive only for a short time, and that, assuming he continues to live for that time, he will be in such excruciating pain that those few days or hours will hold no value for him? Does he have a moral obligation to live through torture? No, of course not. The choice to live is still a choice. If he is convinced that there is no value in living, he has no duty to do so.

Second, what of the prisoner who faces almost certain death if he tries to escape, and a much longer but meaningless life if he remains a prisoner? Under such circumstances, the principle involved is the same as in the previous example: the choice to risk almost certain death is a rational option. Now notice-- in resolving these issues, I did not have to regard happiness or pleasure as ends-in-themselves-- I simply denied that we have a duty to live, which follows from the fact that the standard of value is an objective standard.

Yet there is still a problem here: Ayn Rand states at various points that happiness is the goal of life. Nevertheless, she also states that "... happiness may very well be the purpose of ethics, but it cannot be the standard." To properly deal with this issue, it will be necessary to go into Rand's theory of emotions, which will be one of the topics covered in my forthcoming "The Application of the Objectivist Standard of Value." But prior to my next article, I will say this much: to regard happiness as some which is pursued in addition to life or the values which life requires would be to commit oneself to the premise of the primacy of consciousness, and thus violate one of the central principles of the Objectivist Metaphysics. The proper resolution of this issue will require the avoidance of such a result.


Section Three: The Nature of the Synthesis

I have argued that the survivalists, who regard life as the only end-in-itself were correct in believing that ultimately, there is only one value which, for a given actor, can serve as an end-in-itself, and that, to the extent that the flourishers argue for the existence of more than one value as an end-in-itself, their position proves to be untenable. However, I argued that, insofar as anyone takes the view that one should be rational simply because being rational promotes one's survival, he is wrong: one should be rational, not by reference to the standard of value, but by reference to the standard of objectivity.

In any apparent conflict between the standard of value and the standard of objectivity, one should choose to act in accordance with the standard of objectivity, for it is only by means of the standard of objectivity that one can discover that the conflict was only apparent. Furthermore, I argued that the standard of value is an abstract principle, and therefore, is properly viewed as a derivative of the standard of objectivity, and as such, ulitmately, there can be no conflict between the standard of objectivity and the standard of value, for such a conflict would reduce to the absurdity of a conflict between the standard of objectivity and itself.

But as such, the end-in-itself towards which all the action of a rational being should be directed (by the standard of value) is not simply its own life, but its life as a rational being. In this sense, rationality is not some additional end-in-itself which we must balance against the pursuit of life, but is constitutive of the kind of life which we should pursue. It is not a value to be incrementally traded-off against other values in the pursuit of life, but rather, the means by which we incrementally trade-off some values against others in the pursuit of the rational life.

From this perspective, the interpretation which I have argued for may be viewed as a survivalist interpretation, since there is only one end-in-itself towards which all the action of a given actor should be directed, namely, his own life. But my interpretation may also be viewed as a flourisher interpretation, since the end towards which all of the action of a given actor should be directed is not simply life, but the life of a rational being. Rationality and life are both aspects of the end-in-itself, but they are not parts-- they are inseparable aspects of the life of rationality, and as such, they are attributes which can be separated in thought, but not in reality. In reality, one can no more separate rationality and life from one-another than one can separate the shape and size from the rock which they are attributes of. Both life and rationality are fundamental attributes of man, and since the conceptual level of man's awareness is the seat of man's volitional capacity, reason is man's fundamental means of survival-- as a rational animal. Such, I have concluded, is the meaning of the phrase "man qua man."

In all teleological causation, life serves as the standard of value. However, the manner in which this standard applies to a given organism depends upon what kind of organism that organism is. This should not be at all surprising, for the law of causality is applicable to every entity which exists, nevertheless the manner in which the law of causality applies to a given entity depends upon what kind of entity that entity is: if I release a hammer, one result will follow, but if I release a balloon, an entirely different result may be expected. All organisms act in order to remain alive-- this much they all have in common. But a specific organism has a specific mode of existence, and thus birds fly while fish swim. Man, too, has a specific mode of existence: rational activity. To the extent that he achieves excellence in the performance of this activity, he acts to promote his life and achieve the rational life.

